[browser] high level documentation of WASM features (#89469)
dotnet/runtime: src/mono/wasm/features.md

This property requires the [wasm-tools workload](#wasm-tools-workload) to be installed.

### JITerpreter
The JITerpreter is a browser-specific compiler which will optimize frequently executed code when running in interpreted (non-AOT) mode. While this significantly improves application performance, it will cause increased memory usage. You can disable it via `<BlazorWebAssemblyJiterpreter>false</BlazorWebAssemblyJiterpreter>`, and configure it in more detail via the use of runtime options.

For more information including a list of relevant runtime options, see [jiterpreter.md](../../../docs/design/mono/jiterpreter.md).

### AOT
AOT compilation greatly improves application performance but will increase the size of the application, resulting in longer downloads and slower startup, so it is currently disabled by default. To enable it, use `<RunAOTCompilation>true</RunAOTCompilation>`. This is effective only when publishing the project. The resulting ahead-of-time compiled code will be included in your application's `dotnet.native.wasm` file.

This feature only works if you have the [wasm-tools workload](#wasm-tools-workload) installed.

### IL trimming

> Trimming will remove unused code from your application, which reduces application startup time and memory usage. Trimming also reduces the amount of time spent during AOT compilation if it is in use. To enable trimming of managed code, use `<PublishTrimmed>true</PublishTrimmed>` and `<EnableAggressiveTrimming>true</EnableAggressiveTrimming>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trimming will remove unused code from your application, which reduces application startup time and memory usage. Trimming also reduces the amount of time spent during AOT compilation if it is in use. To enable trimming of managed code, use `<PublishTrimmed>true</PublishTrimmed>` and `<TrimMode>full</TrimMode>`.
```

EnableAggressiveTrimming is really a setting for use inside dotnet/runtime not for general consumption

## EH - Exception handling
Is performance optimization enabled by default. It requires recent version of browser.

You can disable it by `<WasmEnableExceptionHandling>false</WasmEnableExceptionHandling>`.

See also WebAssembly proposal [Exceptions.md](https://github.com/WebAssembly/exception-handling/blob/master/proposals/exception-handling/Exceptions.md)

## BigInt
Is required if the application uses Int64 marshaling in JS interop.
See also WebAssembly proposal [JS-BigInt](https://github.com/WebAssembly/JS-BigInt-integration)

## fetch browser API

Is required if the application uses [HttpClient](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httpclient)

NodeJS needs to install `node-fetch` and `node-abort-controller` npm packages.

## WebSocket browser API

Is required if the application uses [WebSocketClient](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.websockets.clientwebsocket)

NodeJS needs to install `ws` npm package.

## Content security policy

dotnet runtime for wasm is CSP compliant starting from .Net 8, except legacy JS interop methods.

> In order to enable it, please set HTTP headers similar to `Content-Security-Policy: default-src 'self' 'wasm-unsafe-eval'`

Reviewer 2: We could also specify that wasm-unsafe-eval is not needed if you disable the jiterpreter

Author: I think until could could ES6 `import` wasm module, the `wasm-unsafe-eval` is always necessary. Because we just compile some bytes.

See https://github.com/WebAssembly/content-security-policy/blob/main/proposals/CSP.md#the-wasm-unsafe-eval-source-directive

I was not sure, so I tested it even with `WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming` and still I get `CompileError: WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(): Refused to compile or instantiate WebAssembly module because 'unsafe-eval' is not an allowed source of script in the following Content Security Policy directive: "script-src 'self'"`

See also [CSP on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP)

## ICU

_TODO_

## Timezones

Browsers don't offer API for working with time zone database and so we have to bring the time zone data as part of the application.

If your application doesn't need to work with TZ, you can reduce download size by `<InvariantTimezone>true</InvariantTimezone>`.
This requires that you have [wasm-tools workload](#wasm-tools-workload) installed.

# Shell environments - NodeJS & V8
We pass most of the unit tests with NodeJS v 14 but it's not fully supported target platform. We would like to hear about community use-cases.

> We also use v8 engine version 11 or higher to run some of the tests. The engine is lacking many APIs and features.

Reviewer 2: In this case it's not "the engine" lacking many APIs and features but instead the d8 shell, which is what jsvu is installing. So something like this might be better:

`We also use the d8 command-line shell, version 11 or higher, to run some of the tests. This shell lacks most browser APIs and features.`

# Mobile phones

> Recent mobile phones have browser integration which could be upgraded separately from the operating system.

Reviewer 2: Something like `Recent mobile phones distribute their browser as an application that can be upgraded separately from the operating system.` might be clearer here.

> Also note that all browsers on iOS are just wrapper for Safari engine and so it's limited by Safari features and version, rather than wrapper version and brand.

Reviewer 2: I suggest `Note that all browsers on iOS and iPadOS are required to use the Safari browser engine, so their level of support for WASM features depends on the version of Safari installed on the device.`

> Mobile phones usually have limited resources. Memory and download speed are major concern.

Reviewer 2: I suggest `Mobile browsers typically have strict limits on the amount of memory they can use, and many users are on slow internet connections. A WebAssembly application that works well on desktop PCs may take minutes to download or run out of memory before it is able to start.`

## Resources consumed on the target device

dotnet is complex and large application, it consists of
- dotnet runtime, including garbage collector, IL interpreter and browser specific JIT
- dotnet base class library
- emulation layer which is bringing missing features of the OS, which the browser doesn't provide. Like timezone database or ICU.
- integration with the browser JavaScript APIs, for example HTTP and WebSocket client
- application code

All of the mentioned code and data need to be downloaded and loaded into the browser memory during the dotnet startup sequence.
Browser itself will run JIT compilation of the WASM and JS code, which consumes memory and CPU cycles too.

## WASM linear memory

You can override initial size of the WASM linear memory by `<EmccInitialHeapSize>16777216</EmccInitialHeapSize>`.

> This requires that you have [wasm-tools workload](#wasm-tools-workload) installed.

Reviewer 2: We could also explain briefly here why you might choose to do this, i.e. `Setting an initial size based on how much memory your application typically uses will reduce the number of times the heap needs to grow, which may enable it to run on devices with lower memory`. I assume that's the reason for doing this, anyway.

## JITerpreter

> Is browser specific JIT compiler which optimizes small fragments of code which are otherwise interpreted by dotnet mono interpreter. It's enabled by default.

Reviewer 2: We could state here that it will increase memory usage, and mention that the jiterpreter documentation (with a link to it) explains how to disable it.

## AOT

You can enable Ahead Of Time compilation by `<RunAOTCompilation>true</RunAOTCompilation>`.
This requires that you have [wasm-tools workload](#wasm-tools-workload) installed.

It will compile managed code as native WASM instructions and include them in the `dotnet.native.wasm` file.

> AOT compiled code is running faster but it will significantly increase size of the file and the download time.

Reviewer 2: Something like `AOT compilation greatly improves application performance but will increase the size of the application, resulting in longer downloads and slower startup.`

## IL trimming

> You can trim size of the managed code in the assemblies by `<PublishTrimmed>true</PublishTrimmed>`.

Reviewer 2: It's probably worth explaining in more detail what IL trimming does and why you would want to use it, like
`Trimming will remove unused code from your application, which reduces download time and memory usage. When AOT compilation is in use, trimming will also reduce the amount of time spent to compile the application.`

Reviewer 2: We may also want to warn that `Some applications will break if trimming is used without further configuration due to the trimmer not knowing which code is used` and link to the documentation on trimming so users can configure it.

## C code or native linked libraries

You can enable native rebuild by `<WasmBuildNative>true</WasmBuildNative>`.

> This requires that you have [wasm-tools workload](#wasm-tools-workload) installed.

Reviewer 2: We should consider explaining what native rebuild does and why you would use it, like `native rebuild will cause the entire .NET runtime to be re-built alongside your application, which allows you to link additional libraries into the binary or change compiler configuration flags.`

## wasm-tools workload

> Is set of compiler tools which allow you to optimize your wasm application.

Reviewer 2: Something like `The optional wasm-tools workload contains all of the tools and libraries necessary to perform native rebuild or AOT compilation` might be better here

| file extension  | Content-Type |
|---|---|
|.wasm|application/wasm|
|.json|application/json|
|.js|text/javascript|

See also [Content-Type on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Type)

## Compression

Modern browsers are able to unpack files compressed for the transport. We recommend brotli compression for best results.

See also [Content-Encoding on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Encoding)

## Content security policy

dotnet runtime for wasm is CSP compliant starting from .Net 8, except legacy JS interop methods.

In order to enable it, please set HTTP headers similar to `Content-Security-Policy: default-src 'self' 'wasm-unsafe-eval'`

HTTP headers are sent by your HTTP server or proxy, which need to be properly configured.

See also [CSP on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP)

See also [wasm-unsafe-eval](https://github.com/WebAssembly/content-security-policy/blob/main/proposals/CSP.md#the-wasm-unsafe-eval-source-directive)

## ICU

Browsers don't offer full set APIs for working with localization and so we have to bring the data and the logic as part of the application.

> If your application doesn't need to work with locatization, you can reduce download size by `<InvariantCulture>true</InvariantCulture>`.

Reviewer 3: We could link the general doc about Invariant mode here: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/design/features/globalization-invariant-mode.md

> If your application needs to work with locatization but you don't require processing speed for processing of large texts, you can reduce download size by `<HybridGlobalization>true</HybridGlobalization>`.

Reviewer 3: Link this one https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/design/features/globalization-hybrid-mode.md

It will use browser APIs instead part of ICU database. This feature is still in development.

> If your application needs to work with specific subset of locales, you can create your own ICU database.

Reviewer 3: Here we are missing info about sharding and general logic of ICU files (choosing based on culture etc.) that is included in https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/design/features/globalization-icu-wasm.md, so I would just redirect to that link. "To learn how Globalization works when Invariant and Hybrid modes are off, see: [doc]."

## JavaScript interoperability

When you want to call JavaScript functions from C# or managed code from JavaScript, you can annotate static C# methods with `[JSImport]` or `[JSExport]` attributes.

You can read [blog article](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/use-net-7-from-any-javascript-app-in-net-7/) about it.

You can also explore simple [TODO app sample](https://github.com/pavelsavara/dotnet-wasm-todo-mvc).

For more details please see [documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/blazor/javascript-interoperability/import-export-interop).

## Embedding dotnet in existing JavaScript applications

The npm tool chains usual in the JavaScript community are not well integrated with the MSBuild tool chain of the dotnet.
Your project will need to handle both build systems.

You will need pass output of the MSBuild from the `AppBundle` folder for the npm toolchain to process and host it on your web server with the other assets of your application.

You can also explore simple sample of dotnet as [React component](https://github.com/maraf/dotnet-wasm-react).

# Downloaded assets

> ## Project folder structure

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Project folder structure for the `wasmbrowser` template
```

Author: That structure is now same for all targets

Described as relative to simple application project.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

### Source directory

```

- `./wwwroot` is optional project folder, into which you can place files which should be also deployed to the web server.

> - `./bin/Release/net8.0/browser-wasm/AppBundle` folder which should be hosted by the HTTP server.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Build output directories

The following shows the structure for a Release build, but except the name in the various paths, the rest is applicable for a `Debug` build too.

- `./bin/Release/net8.0/browser-wasm/AppBundle` folder which should be hosted by the HTTP server.
```

Author: I see, splitting it with headers makes sense

- `./bin/Release/net8.0/browser-wasm/AppBundle/index.html` - the page which is hosting the application.
- `./bin/Release/net8.0/browser-wasm/AppBundle/main.js` - typically the main JavaScript entry point, it will `import { dotnet } from './_framework/dotnet.js'` and `await dotnet.run();`.

> - `./bin/Release/net8.0/browser-wasm/AppBundle/_framework` - contains all the assets of the runtime and the managed application.
> 
> You can flatten the `_framework` folder away by `<WasmRuntimeAssetsLocation>./</WasmRuntimeAssetsLocation>` in the project file.
> 
> ## `_framework` folder structure

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

#### `./bin/Release/net8.0/browser-wasm/AppBundle/_framework` folder structure

- `./bin/Release/net8.0/browser-wasm/AppBundle/_framework` - contains all the assets of the runtime and the managed application.
```

- `dotnet.js` - is the main entrypoint with the [JavaScript API](#JavaScript-API). It will load the rest of the runtime.

> - `dotnet.native.js` - is posix emulation layer by [emscripten](https://github.com/emscripten-core/emscripten) project

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `dotnet.native.js` - is a posix emulation layer provided by the [Emscripten](https://github.com/emscripten-core/emscripten) project
```

- `dotnet.runtime.js` - is integration of the dotnet with the browser

> - `blazor.boot.json` - contains list of all other assets and their integrity hash and also various configuration flags.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `blazor.boot.json` - contains list of all other assets and their integrity hash and also various configuration flags. Note: even though this file has `blazor` in its name, it is completely independent of `Blazor`.
```

Author: At this point I'm not sure I love that we have that file name. I would not elaborate it in the doc.

> - `dotnet.native.wasm` - is the compiled binaries of the dotnet (Mono) runtime.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `dotnet.native.wasm` - is the compiled binary of the dotnet (Mono) runtime.
```

- `System.Private.CoreLib.wasm`

> - `*.wasm` - are .NET assemblies wrapped as .wasm files in WebCIL forma for better compatibility with antivirus solutions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `*.wasm` - are .NET assemblies wrapped as `.wasm` files in `WebCIL` format for better compatibility with antivirus solutions.
```

> - `dotnet.js.map` - is source map file, for easier debugging of the runtime code. It's not included in published apps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `dotnet.js.map` - is a source map file, for easier debugging of the runtime code. It's not included in the published apps.
```

> - `dotnet.native.js.symbols` - are debug symbols which help to put C runtime method names back to the .wasm stack traces. You could enable it by `<WasmEmitSymbolMap>true</WasmEmitSymbolMap>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `dotnet.native.js.symbols` - are debug symbols which help to put `C` runtime method names back into the `.wasm` stack traces. You can enable it by `<WasmEmitSymbolMap>true</WasmEmitSymbolMap>`.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Note: You can flatten the `_framework` folder away by `<WasmRuntimeAssetsLocation>./</WasmRuntimeAssetsLocation>` in the project file.

```

## Caching, Integrity

Your browser could be caching various files and assets downloaded by the dotnet runtime so that the next application start will be much faster.

When you deploy a new version of the application, you need to make sure that the caches in the browser and also in any HTTP proxies will not interfere.

WARNING: Your server can't force the browser to ask for the file on the same URL again, if the browser thinks that the file is fresh enough.

_TODO_ discuss cache busting strategies.

> In order to make sure that the application resources are consistent with each other, dotnet runtime will use `integrity` hash for all downloaded resources.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In order to make sure that the application resources are consistent with each other, the dotnet runtime will use `integrity` hashes for all the downloaded resources.
```

See also [Cache-Control on headers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control)

See also [fetch integrity](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Request/integrity)

## MIME types

> Are `Content-Type` HTTP headers which tell the browser about the type of downloaded asset. They are necessary for correct and fast processing by the browser, but also by various caches and proxies.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Are `Content-Type` HTTP headers which tell the browser about the type of the downloaded asset. They are necessary for correct and fast processing by the browser, but also needed by various caches and proxies.
```

HTTP headers are sent by your HTTP server or proxy, which need to be properly configured.

| file extension  | Content-Type |
|---|---|
|.wasm|application/wasm|
|.json|application/json|
|.js|text/javascript|

See also [Content-Type on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Type)

## Compression

> Modern browsers are able to unpack files compressed for the transport. We recommend brotli compression for best results.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Modern browsers are able to unpack files compressed for the transport. We recommend `brotli` compression for best results.
```

See also [Content-Encoding on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Encoding)

## Content security policy

> dotnet runtime for wasm is CSP compliant starting from .Net 8, except legacy JS interop methods.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
dotnet runtime for wasm is CSP compliant starting with .Net 8, except legacy JS interop methods.
```

In order to enable it, please set HTTP headers similar to `Content-Security-Policy: default-src 'self' 'wasm-unsafe-eval'`

HTTP headers are sent by your HTTP server or proxy, which need to be properly configured.

See also [CSP on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP)

See also [wasm-unsafe-eval](https://github.com/WebAssembly/content-security-policy/blob/main/proposals/CSP.md#the-wasm-unsafe-eval-source-directive)

## Globalization, ICU

Browsers don't offer full set APIs for working with localization and so we have to bring the data and the logic as part of the application.

> In order to make downloades smaller, runtime will detect the locale of the browser and load just shard of the ICU database. You can also create and configure your own custom shards.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In order to make downloads smaller, the runtime will detect the locale of the browser and load just a shard of the ICU database, which would only contain a few locales. You can also create and configure your own custom shards.
```

For more details see [globalization-icu-wasm.md](../../../docs/design/features/globalization-icu-wasm.md)

> If your application doesn't need to work with locatization, you can reduce download size by `<InvariantCulture>true</InvariantCulture>`.

Reviewer 4: Did you mean `InvariantGlobalization`?
```suggestion
If your application doesn't need to work with localization, you can reduce the download size by `<InvariantGlobalization>true</InvariantGlobalization>`.
```

For more details see [globalization-invariant-mode.md](../../../docs/design/features/globalization-invariant-mode.md)

> If your application needs to work with locatization but you don't require processing speed for working with large texts, you can reduce download size by `<HybridGlobalization>true</HybridGlobalization>`.
> It will use browser APIs instead part of ICU database. This feature is still in development.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If your application needs to work with localization but you don't require fast processing speed for working with large texts, you can reduce the download size by `<HybridGlobalization>true</HybridGlobalization>`. It will use browser APIs instead parts of the ICU database. This feature is still in development.
```

For more details see [globalization-hybrid-mode.md](../../../docs/design/features/globalization-hybrid-mode.md)

This requires that you have [wasm-tools workload](#wasm-tools-workload) installed.

## Timezones

Browsers don't offer API for working with time zone database and so we have to bring the time zone data as part of the application.

> If your application doesn't need to work with time zones, you can reduce download size by `<InvariantTimezone>true</InvariantTimezone>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If your application doesn't need to work with time zones, you can reduce the download size by `<InvariantTimezone>true</InvariantTimezone>`.
```

This requires that you have [wasm-tools workload](#wasm-tools-workload) installed.

## Bundling JavaScript and other assets

In the web ecosystem it's usual that developers use assets bundlers like [webpack](https://github.com/webpack/webpack) or [rollup](https://github.com/rollup/rollup) to bundle many files into one large .js file.

You can bundle the `dotnet.js` ES6 module with the rest of your JavaScript application.

The other assets and JS modules of the dotnet are loaded via dynamic `import` or via `fetch` APIs. They are not ready to be bundled in Net8.

> We consider that the dotnet application is usually large as is and giving the browser chance to start compiling it in parallel with other downloads is better.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We consider that the dotnet application is usually large as-is and giving the browser a chance to start compiling it in parallel with other downloads is better.
```

> We would like to [hear from the community](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/86162) more about the use-cases when it would be benefitial.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We would like to [hear from the community](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/86162) more about the use-cases where it would be beneficial.
```

# Resources consumed on the target device

dotnet is complex and large application, it consists of
- dotnet runtime, including garbage collector, IL interpreter and browser specific JIT
- dotnet base class library
- emulation layer which is bringing missing features of the OS, which the browser doesn't provide. Like timezone database or ICU.
- integration with the browser JavaScript APIs, for example HTTP and WebSocket client
- application code

> All of the mentioned code and data need to be downloaded and loaded into the browser memory during the dotnet startup sequence.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All of the mentioned code and data needs to be downloaded and loaded into the browser memory during the dotnet startup sequence.
```

> Browser itself will run JIT compilation of the WASM and JS code, which consumes memory and CPU cycles too.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The browser itself will run the JIT compilation of the WASM and JS code, which consumes memory and CPU cycles.
```

## Mobile phones

Recent mobile phones distribute their browser as an application that can be upgraded separately from the operating system.

Note that all browsers on iOS and iPadOS are required to use the Safari browser engine, so their level of support for WASM features depends on the version of Safari installed on the device.

Mobile browsers typically have strict limits on the amount of memory they can use, and many users are on slow internet connections. A WebAssembly application that works well on desktop PCs may take minutes to download or run out of memory before it is able to start.

## Shell environments - NodeJS & V8
We pass most of the unit tests with NodeJS v 14 but it's not fully supported target platform. We would like to hear about community use-cases.

We also use the d8 command-line shell, version 11 or higher, to run some of the tests. This shell lacks most browser APIs and features.

## Trade-offs compared to native JavaScript applications

> There is trade-off between download size, application performance and complexity of application maintanance.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There is a trade-off between download size, application performance and complexity of application maintenance.
```

> If your business logic is very complex, changes often or you already have existing C# codebase and skillset, running the same code dotnet on wasm is probably the right choice.
> If your application is simple and you have JavaScript skills on your team, it may be better if you re/write your logic in Web native technologies like HTML/JavaScript or typescript/webpack stack.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If your business logic is very complex, changes often or you already have existing C# codebase and skillset, then running the same code with dotnet on wasm is probably the right choice.
- If your application is simple and you have JavaScript skills on your team, it may be better if you re/write your logic in Web native technologies like HTML/JavaScript or typescript/webpack stack.
```

# wasm-tools workload

> The wasm-tools workload contains all of the tools and libraries necessary to perform native rebuild or AOT compilation and other optimizations of your application.
> 
> Although it's optional for Blazor, we strongly recommend using it!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The wasm-tools workload contains all of the tools and libraries necessary to perform native rebuild or AOT compilation and other optimizations of your application. Although it's optional for Blazor, we strongly recommend using it!
```

You can install it by running `dotnet workload install wasm-tools` on your command line.

> You can also install `dotnet workload install wasm-experimental`.

Reviewer 4: Something about what's in this?

Author: Is that the correct name for the workload with MT and templates ?
